# Preface

I wrote this book for several reasons. I have written several electrophysiology data processing packages in Python and felt like there was no one good source for learning about electrophysiology, signal processing, and data analysis. Electrophysiology also has the problem of the Beginners Curse. There is a pretty steep learning curve for both being able to do experiments and analyze experiments. The steeper the learning curve the worse your outcomes at the beginning (thus the curse). To help people get over that hill faster I thought I would write a modern, electrophysiology handbook. In my personal journey I had a lot of web searchs (or more recently LLM queries) and a lot time wasted on bad resources (including many LLM queries) or pulling snippets from different sources. Along the way of learning how to process and analyze electrophysiology data I also learned a lot about why you would want to do certain experiments. I thought why not combine electrophysiology analysis with the reasons why we do certain experiments. Lastly, to push the envelope of your experimental design I believe that you must embrace custom analysis. Your experiments are only as good as your analysis. With the NIH looking to push computational modeling it is even more important to really understand the data you collect.

This book covers several topics. The first parts covers essential slice electrophyiosology topics like solutions and equipment. The first part of the covers analysis of experiments using the tools available in Python. The last part of the book covers some statistical and signal processing topics that I feel really need more attention by both neuroscientists and electrophysiologists that include distributions, curves, variance, etc.

Throughout the book you may notice that some plots are interactive and others are not. Many of the non-interactive plots are there to reduce the size of the HTML pages which unfortunately leads to inconsistent formating. Interactive plots contain data that you should interact with.
I would like to thank the many useful people (AKA lab mice and guinea pigs) who have given me feedback.