# Signals
Signals are the transmission of data (see [Wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Signal) for more). This can be sounds, electrical signals (like electrophysiology), images, etc. Many signals that we are interested in are continuous, analog signals where as the signals we have analyzed in this book are discrete, quantized signals. This chapter will go into the basics of signal acquisition and how digital signals are represented. We will also cover some basic signal processing techniques such as the FFT and convolution. If you want more details I suggest reading _The scientist and engineer's guide to digital signal processing_.

## Electrophysiological signals
Electrophysiology is the analysis of electrical signals biological systems and tissue. The electrophysiology analysis covered in this book is about the analysis of electrical signals in neurons collected through patch clamp electrophysiology. Other ways to study electrophysiology are sharp electrode recordings, EEG, EMG, LFP, single-unit recordings, multi-electrode arrays and magnetoencephalography (this one is indirect since it detects magnetic fields generated by electrochemical signals). A lot of the analysis and signal processing used in this book is applicable to all these other techniques but the end point is usually different.

Electrical signals in biological tissue are generated by charged ions (electrochemical) and not the flow of energy through electrons as in metal or semiconductors. In biological tissues we are detecting the flow of ions in and out cells or through axons. Ions in tend to have different concentrations inside and outside of cells. The difference of ions creates a potential or voltage difference. The voltage difference can change due to the flow ions through receptors which creates currents. The voltage differences and current are what we detect in patch clamp.